

HTTP Working Group                                      David M. Kristol
INTERNET DRAFT                    Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
<draft-kristol-http-proxy-state-00.txt>
May 26, 1998                                   Expires November 26, 1998


                 HTTP Proxy State Management Mechanism



                          Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are
     working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force
     (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
     groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
     ``work in progress.''

     To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
     the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
     Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
     (Northern Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au
     (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu
     (US West Coast).

     This is author's draft 1.3.


1.  ABSTRACT

This document specifies a way to create a stateful session, using HTTP
requests and responses, between an HTTP proxy server and its client.  It
describes two new headers, Pcookie and Set-Pcookie, which carry state
information between participating HTTP proxy servers and their clients.


2.  INTRODUCTION

RFC 2109 defines an HTTP State Management Mechanism that applies between
user agents and origin servers.  That is, it is end-to-end.  Occasions
arise, however, where it is useful for an HTTP proxy server and its
client (which could be a user agent or another proxy server) to share
state.  That is, the proxy server has state information about its
relationship with the client that it wants the client to remember and to
return with each request.  Examples include identity or preference
information.  This specification defines such a mechanism, which is
modeled after the end-to-end mechanism.






Kristol          draft-kristol-http-proxy-state-00.txt          [Page 1]







INTERNET DRAFT   HTTP Proxy State Management Mechanism      May 26, 1998



3.  TERMINOLOGY

The terms user agent, client, server, proxy, and origin server have the
same meaning as in the HTTP/1.1 specification [RFC 2068].

Host name (HN) means either the host domain name (HDN) or the numeric
Internet Protocol (IP) address of a host.  The fully qualified domain
name is preferred; use of numeric IP addresses is strongly discouraged.

The term proxy-host refers to the proxy, both host name and port, that
receives a request, and request-URI refers to the abs_path portion of
the absoluteURI (http_URL) of the HTTP request line.

To maintain parallel terminology with the HTTP State Management
Mechanism, I will use the term Pcookie to refer to the state information
that passes between a proxy server and client, and that gets stored by
the client.








4.  STATE AND SESSIONS

This document describes a way to create stateful sessions with HTTP
requests and responses.  Currently, HTTP proxy servers respond to each
client request without relating that request to previous or subsequent
requests; this state management mechanism allows clients and proxy
servers that wish to exchange state information to place HTTP requests
and responses within a larger context, which I term a ``proxy session.''


5.  DESCRIPTION

I describe here a way for a proxy server to send state information to
its client, and for the client to return the state information to the
proxy server.  The goal is to have a minimal impact on HTTP clients and
proxy servers.

5.1  Syntax:  General

The two state management headers, Set-Pcookie and Pcookie, have common
syntactic properties involving attribute-value pairs.  The following
grammar uses the notation, and tokens DIGIT (decimal digits), token
(informally, a sequence of non-special, non-white space characters), and
http_URL from the HTTP/1.1 specification [RFC 2068] to describe their
syntax.




Kristol          draft-kristol-http-proxy-state-00.txt          [Page 2]







INTERNET DRAFT   HTTP Proxy State Management Mechanism      May 26, 1998



av-pairs        =       av-pair *(";" av-pair)
av-pair         =       attr ["=" value]                ; optional value
attr            =       token
value           =       token | quoted-string

Attributes (names) (attr) are case-insensitive.  White space is
permitted between tokens.  Note that while the above syntax description
shows value as optional, most attrs require them.

NOTE:  The syntax above allows whitespace between the attribute and the
= sign.

5.2  Proxy Server Role

5.2.1  General  The proxy server initiates a session, if it so desires.
To do so, it returns an extra response header to the client, Set-
Pcookie.  (The details follow later.)

A client returns a Pcookie request header (see below) to the proxy
server if it chooses to continue a session.  The proxy server may ignore
it or use it to determine the current state of the session.  It may send
back to the client a Set-Pcookie response header with the same or
different information, or it may send no Set-Pcookie header at all.  The
origin server effectively ends a session by sending the client a Set-
Pcookie header with Max-Age=0.

Proxy servers may return Set-Pcookie response headers with any response.
Clients should send Pcookie request headers, subject to other rules
detailed below, with every request.

5.2.2  Set-Pcookie Syntax  The syntax for the Set-Pcookie response
header is

set-pcookie-hdr =       "Set-Pcookie:" 1#set-pcookie
set-pcookie     =       NAME "=" VALUE *(";" set-pcookie-av)
NAME            =       attr
VALUE           =       value
set-pcookie-av  =       "CommentURL" "=" <"> http_URL <">
                |       "Max-Age" "=" value
                |       "Persist" "=" value
                |       "Version" "=" 1*DIGIT

Informally, the Set-Pcookie response header comprises the token Set-
Pcookie:, followed by a comma-separated list of one or more Pcookies.
Each Pcookie begins with a NAME=VALUE pair, followed by zero or more
semi-colon-separated attribute-value pairs.  The syntax for attribute-
value pairs was shown earlier.  The specific attributes and the
semantics of their values follows.  The NAME=VALUE attribute-value pair
must come first in each Pcookie.  The others, if present, can occur in
any order.  If an attribute appears more than once in a set-pcookie,
only the value associated with the first appearance of the attribute



Kristol          draft-kristol-http-proxy-state-00.txt          [Page 3]







INTERNET DRAFT   HTTP Proxy State Management Mechanism      May 26, 1998



shall be used; subsequent values after the first must be ignored.

The NAME of a Pcookie may be the same as one of the attributes in this
specification.  However, because the Pcookie's NAME must come first in a
Set-Pcookie response header, the NAME and its VALUE cannot be confused
with an attribute-value pair.

NAME=VALUE
     Required.  The name of the state information (``Pcookie'') is NAME,
     and its value is VALUE.

     The VALUE is opaque to the client and may be anything the proxy
     server chooses to send, possibly in a server-selected printable
     ASCII encoding.  ``Opaque'' implies that the content is of interest
     and relevance only to the proxy server.  The content may, in fact,
     be readable by anyone that examines the Set-Pcookie header.

CommentURL="http_URL"
     Optional.  Because Pcookies could be used to derive or store
     private information about a user, the CommentURL attribute allows a
     proxy server to document how it intends to use the Pcookie.  The
     user can inspect the information identified by the URL to decide
     whether to initiate or continue a session with this Pcookie.

Max-Age=value
     Optional.  The value of the Max-Age attribute defines the lifetime
     of the Pcookie, in seconds.  The delta-seconds value is a decimal
     non-negative integer.  After delta-seconds seconds elapse, the
     client should discard the Pcookie.  A value of zero means the
     Pcookie should be discarded immediately.

Persist=value
     Optional.  The value of the Persist attribute determines whether
     the client should remember the value of the Pcookie across client
     invocations.  The value must be either yes or no.

Version=value
     Required.  The value of the Version attribute, a decimal integer,
     identifies the version of the state management specification to
     which the Pcookie conforms.  For this specification, Version=0
     applies.

5.3  Client Role

5.3.1  Interpreting Set-Pcookie  The client keeps separate track of
state information that arrives via Set-Pcookie response headers from
each proxy server (as distinguished by name or IP address and port).
The client must ignore attribute-value pairs whose attribute it does not
recognize, or whose value it does not understand.  The client applies
these defaults for optional attributes that are missing from a Set-
Pcookie response header:



Kristol          draft-kristol-http-proxy-state-00.txt          [Page 4]







INTERNET DRAFT   HTTP Proxy State Management Mechanism      May 26, 1998



Max-Age The default behavior is to discard the Pcookie when the client
        exits.

Persist The default behavior is dictated by the presence or absence of a
        Max-Age attribute.  If a Max-Age attribute is present, the
        default is Persist=yes.  Otherwise the default is Persist=no.

5.3.2  Pcookie Management  If a client receives a Set-Pcookie response
header whose NAME is the same as a pre-existing Pcookie from the same
proxy-host, the new Pcookie supersedes the old.  However, if the Set-
Pcookie has a value for Max-Age of zero, the (old and new) Pcookie is
discarded.  Otherwise a Pcookie persists (resources permitting) until
whichever happens first, then gets discarded:  its Max-Age lifetime is
exceeded; or, if the Persist=no attribute is set, the client terminates
the session.

Because clients have finite space in which to store Pcookies, they may
also discard older Pcookies to make space for newer ones, using, for
example, a least-recently-used algorithm, along with constraints on the
maximum number of Pcookies that each proxy server may set.

If a Set-Pcookie response header includes a CommentURL attribute,
clients that are also user agents should store that information in a
human-readable form with the Pcookie, or, preferably, should allow the
user to follow the http_URL link as part of a Pcookie inspection user
interface.

User agents should allow the user to control Pcookie destruction, but
they must not extend the Pcookie's lifetime beyond that controlled by
the Max-Age and Persist attributes.  An infrequently-used Pcookie may
function as a ``preferences file'' for network applications, and a user
may wish to keep it even if it is the least-recently-used Pcookie.  One
possible implementation would be an interface that allows the permanent
storage of a Pcookie through a checkbox (or, conversely, its immediate
destruction).

Privacy considerations dictate that the user have considerable control
over Pcookie management.  The PRIVACY section contains more information.

5.3.3  Sending Pcookies to the Proxy Server  When it sends a request to
a proxy server, the client sends a Pcookie request header if it has
Pcookies that are applicable to the request, based on

   * the proxy-host

   * the Pcookie's age.

The syntax for the header is:






Kristol          draft-kristol-http-proxy-state-00.txt          [Page 5]







INTERNET DRAFT   HTTP Proxy State Management Mechanism      May 26, 1998



pcookie-hdr     =       "Pcookie:" 1#pcookie
pcookie         =       pcookie-value *(";" pcookie-av)
pcookie-av      =       pcookie-version
pcookie-value   =       NAME "=" VALUE
pcookie-version =       "Version" "=" value
NAME            =       attr
VALUE           =       value

The value of the pcookie-version attribute must be the value from the
Version attribute of the corresponding Set-Pcookie response header.
Otherwise the value for pcookie-version is 0.

Note that there is no CommentURL attribute in the Pcookie request header
that would correspond to the one in the Set-Pcookie response header.
The client does not return the comment information to the proxy server.

The proxy applies the following rules to choose applicable pcookie-
values to send in Pcookie request headers from among all the Pcookies it
has received.

Domain Selection
     The client returns Pcookies to the proxy-host from which they came,
     but only when that proxy-host is being used as a proxy server for
     HTTP requests.

Max-Age Selection
     Pcookies that have expired should have been discarded and thus are
     not sent to a proxy server.

Note that multiple Pcookies can satisfy the criteria above.  They are
sent in the Pcookie header in arbitrary order.


6.  PRIVACY

Informed consent should guide the design of systems that use Pcookies.
A client should be able to find out how a proxy plans to use information
in a Pcookie and should be able to choose whether or not those policies
are acceptable.  Both the client and the proxy server must assist
informed consent.

6.1  Client (User Agent) Role

A client that is a user agent should provide users with a way to control
and examine Pcookies.  The control mechanisms provided should at least
allow the user

   * to completely disable the sending and saving of Pcookies.

   * to determine whether a stateful proxy session is in progress.




Kristol          draft-kristol-http-proxy-state-00.txt          [Page 6]







INTERNET DRAFT   HTTP Proxy State Management Mechanism      May 26, 1998



   * to control the saving of a Pcookie on the basis of the Pcookie's
     proxy-host.

Such control could be provided, for example, by mechanisms

   * to notify the user when the user agent is about to send a Pcookie
     to the proxy server, to offer the option not to begin a session.

   * to display a visual indication that a stateful proxy session is in
     progress.

   * to let the user decide which Pcookies, if any, should be saved when
     the user concludes a window or user agent session.

   * to let the user examine the contents of a Pcookie at any time.

6.2  Proxy Server Role

A proxy server should promote informed consent by adding CommentURL
information to the Pcookies it sends.  CommentURL can provide rich
information in a multiplicity of languages.


7.  SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

7.1  Clear Text

The information in the Set-Pcookie and Pcookie headers is unprotected.
Two consequences are:

  1.  Any sensitive information that is conveyed in them is exposed to
      intruders.

  2.  A malicious intermediary could alter the headers as they travel in
      either direction, with unpredictable results.

These facts imply that information of a personal and/or financial nature
should only be sent over a secure channel.  For less sensitive
information, or when the content of the header is a database key, an
origin server should be vigilant to prevent a bad Pcookie value from
causing failures.


8.  AUTHOR'S ADDRESS










Kristol          draft-kristol-http-proxy-state-00.txt          [Page 7]







INTERNET DRAFT   HTTP Proxy State Management Mechanism      May 26, 1998



David M. Kristol
Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies
600 Mountain Ave.  Room 2A-333
Murray Hill, NJ  07974

Phone: (908) 582-2250
FAX: (908) 582-1239
Email: dmk@bell-labs.com




                                               Expires November 26, 1998









































Kristol          draft-kristol-http-proxy-state-00.txt          [Page 8]




