


Session Identification URI                                                    


   INTERNET DRAFT                           Phillip M. Hallam-Baker, W3C
   Expires in six months                          email: <hallam@w3.org>
                                                       Dan Connolly, W3C
                                                email: <connolly@w3.org>
                                                      21st February 1996
   


                         Session Identification URI 


                     <draft-hallam-http-session-id-00.txt>


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet draft. Internet drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working information as Internet drafts. 


   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and can be updated, replaced or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet drafts as reference
   material or to cite them as other than as "work in progress". 


   To learn the current status of any Internet draft please check the
   "lid-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet drafts shadow
   directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East coast) or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West coast). Further information about the IETF can
   be found at URL: http://www.cnri.reston.va.us/ 


   Distribution of this document is unlimited. Please send comments to
   the HTTP working group (HTTP-WG) of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF) at < http://www.ics.uci.edu/pub/ietf/http/. This note
   is also avaliable as a World Wide Web Consortium Working Draft
   WD-session-id-960221, archived at 
   http://www.w3.org/pub/WWW/TR/WD-session-id-960221.html 


Abstract 


   A Uniform Resource Identifier for identifying HTTP sessions is
   described. Session identification URIs permit HTTP transactions to
   be linked within a limited domain. This provides a balance between
   the needs of commercial servers for demographic data collection and
   the privacy concerns of users. In addition session identification
   URIs may be used as part of a high security authentication mechanism
   to prevent replay attacks. 


Introduction 


   HTTP is specified as a stateless protocol. This permits HTTP servers
   to handle a large number of simultaneous requests. The stateless
   nature of HTTP reduces its utility however. It is not possible to
   track user reading patterns on a single server nor is is possible


Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                 Page 1




Session Identification URI                                                    


   for a server to adapt its behavior on the basis of previous
   interactions. 


   The ability to trace the path of readers within a Web is important
   for maintainers of larger sites. Trace information may be used to
   analyze the efficacy of cross references within the site, and to
   build profiles of typical users. If it is known for example, that
   readers of an online newspaper who visit the computer section are
   very likely to also visit the business section reporters might be
   asked to provide more cross linkages between these sections.
   Administrators may also wish to discover the number of users
   visiting their site rather than the number of visits. 


Advertising as Revenue for Web Content Providers. 


   Many content providers raise revenue through advertising.
   Advertisers therefore need to know the effectiveness of Web based
   advertising. Content providers who can provide advertisers with
   detailed profiles of the readership of their material will be able
   to charge higher rates. Reader profiling would permit those
   advertisements most likely to obtain a response to be chosen. 


   A distinctive feature of the Web is its interactive nature. Gill
   [Gill96] points out that the interactive nature of the Web may make
   traditional models of "targeted" advertising obsolete, replacing
   them with participatory models. The Web is an information system and
   users who wish to purchase goods are likely to use it to find out
   details. It may be unnecessary to target advertising in an intrusive
   manner (e.g. unsolicited email). As users become accustomed to more
   participatory modes of advertising intrusive methods may become
   counter productive. 


   There are many metrics which an advertiser may with to use to asses
   the value of a Web placement. These include: 


   Hit counts 
       The number of times an advertisement is downloaded. These
       roughly correspond to exposures as understood in conventional
       media. 


   Referrals 
       The number of times an advertising hyperlink is followed. This
       implies that the advertiser also has a Web site. 


   Hot leads and Sales. 
       Referrals which result in readers demonstrating a significant
       level of interest or which generate sales. 


   Referrals may be determined using the HTTP referer field  which
   informs a server of the URI of the resource which referred the
   client to a resource. Unfortunately current log file formats do not
   include this information. A companion document describes an
   extension to the logfile format to record this data. 


Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                 Page 2




Session Identification URI                                                    


   The number of hot leads and/or sales generated by a placement may be
   determined by correlating trace data within the advertiser's home
   Web site with the referer field. This procedure creates an
   interesting correspondence of interest between the parties which
   removes the need for conventional auditing. An advertiser might pay
   the publisher according to the business generated by a placement. It
   is in the advertisers interest to be honest in determining the
   amount paid since the publisher would determine placement frequency
   according to the rate of return. This mechanism is of particular
   interest for adverts targeted at a particular readership where
   auditing may be difficult. 


Privacy Concerns 


   Just because an advertiser is interested in information does not
   mean that the user is willing to provide it. If care is not taken to
   protect the privacy of its users the Web could enable more extensive
   surveillance of its users than has been available to the most
   ruthless dictatorships. 


   The Internet has a strongly developed but highly unpredictable
   ethical sense. It is a medium of active participants, not of passive
   consumers. Users may complain very publically about perceived wrongs
   (whether justified or not) via Usenet which has a readership of
   several millions. Privacy issues in particular are a frequently
   issues. Consequently it is advisable to approach the issue of
   personal privacy cautiously. 


   Users may be prepared to exchange information about themselves in
   return for access to content. Such systems may provide inaccurate
   data however. Users who believe their privacy to be threatened may
   deliberately supply incorrect information, supplying a false address
   and telephone number to prevent unsolicited mail and phone calls. 


   Personal data is often collected by financial institutions to serve
   as a means of customer authentication. Disclosure of personal data
   may therefore increase fraud risks. 


   Many countries have enacted privacy legislation which controls
   storage and use of personal data. Sites which are governed by such
   laws may wish to avoid unnecessary acquisition and recording of
   personal data. 


   Although the Web has gained popularity as a publishing medium it was
   conceived as a collaboration tool. As Turkel points out [Turkel96],
   a part of the interest of cyberspace may be the ability to take on
   different personas, the ability to voice unpopular views without
   risk. Such partitioning of identity requires the ability to separate
   online activity from offline activity and online activity at one
   site with activity at another. The Web should therefore permit users
   to take on new cyberspace identities through use of pseudonyms and
   the boundaries between these identities must be carefully protected. 



Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                 Page 3




Session Identification URI                                                    


   Privacy or lack thereof has often been an unanticipated consequence
   of a particular technology. Early telephone users had little privacy
   since every conversation could be overheard by the operator. This
   lead directly to the automatic exchange which was invented by an
   undertaker whose rival was stealing his business by bribing
   telephone operators. 


   Transactions in the HTTP 1.0 protocol are disjoint. A single request
   is made which results in a single response after which the operation
   is completed and the TCP/IP connection closed. The HTTP/1.1 allows
   the same TCP/IP connection to be used to perform multiple
   operations. 


Pseudo Session Identifiers. 


   IP addresses and ports may be used to provide pseudo identifiers for
   analysis of demographic data. The usefulness of such identifiers is
   severely limited. It is not possible to differentiate two users
   timesharing on a single machine. Nor do users necessarily use the
   same IP address each time. The value of IP addresses for analysis is
   rapidly decreasing due to the growing use of proxies and dynamic IP
   address assignment. These trends will be exacerbated by new
   developments such as mobile IP. 


   Although these pseudo session identifiers are unreliable and
   unsatisfactory they should be taken into consideration when
   considering the privacy issues raised by this proposal. In
   particular it is unnecessary to provide exhaustive proofs of that
   certain forms of linkage cannot be achieved where this is possible
   through similar analysis of IP addresses and ports. 


Relationship to State-Info (Cookies) 


    State Info [Kristol95] is a proposed extension to the HTTP
   protocol. It is a refinement of the Netscape "Cookies" proposal
   [Netscape95]. This mechanism permits a server to generate a token
   which a client which is returned with future requests. This
   mechanism is requires clients to store data for every server visited
   and is consequently unusable with a tracking mechanism unless the
   number of sites using it is small. In the Session Identifier URI
   proposal identifiers are generated by clients, not servers. This
   provides for scalability since a client need only store a fixed
   amount of identifier information regardless of the number of sites
   visited. 


URI Format 


   Session IDs have the form: 


   
   SID:_type_:_realm_:_identifier[_-_thread][_:_count]_
   



Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                 Page 4




Session Identification URI                                                    


   Where the fields _type_, _realm_, _identifier_. _thread_ and _count_
   are defined as follows: 


   type 
       Type of session identifier. This field allows other session
       identifier types to be defined. This draft specifies the
       identifier type "ANON". 


   realm 
       Specifies the realm within which linkage of the identifier is
       possible. Realms have the same format as DNS names. 


   identifier 
       Unstructured random integer specific to realm generated using a
       procedure with a negligible probability of collision. The
       identifier is encoded using base 64. 


   thread 
       Optional extension of identifier field used to differentiate
       concurrent uses of the same session identifier. The thread field
       is an integer encoded in hexadecimal. 


   count 
       Optional Hexadecimal encoded Integer containing a monotonically
       increasing counter value. A client should increment the count
       field after each operation. 


Examples 


   The following example shows a sequence of session identifiers
   created by the same client. Note that the same counter register is
   used to generate all the session identifiers within the same thread. 


   
   SID:ANON:www.w3.org:j6oAOxCWZh/CD723LGeXlf-01:34
   SID:ANON:mc.ai.mit.edu:NRviSpoYm7mdkYB4W2471l-01:35
   SID:ANON:www.w3.org:j6oAOxCWZh/CD723LGeXlf-01:36
   SID:ANON:mc.ai.mit.edu:NRviSpoYm7mdkYB4W2471l-01:37
   SID:ANON:www.w3.org:j6oAOxCWZh/CD723LGeXlf-02:01
   SID:ANON:www.w3.org:j6oAOxCWZh/CD723LGeXlf-01:38
   


Limited Linkage of Session Identifiers. 


   Session Identifier URIs permit linkage of transactions within a
   single _realm_. A realm may be considered to approximate to a DNS
   name. DNS names correlate reasonably well with administrative
   divisions. This allows a content provider to track activities within
   sites on their network but does not permit data from different sites
   to be correlated without specific user authorization in advance. 


Prevention of Replay Attacks 



Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                 Page 5




Session Identification URI                                                    


   Session Identifiers may also be used within a strong authentication
   scheme to prevent replay attacks. A replay attack involve the
   recording of authentic traffic then replaying it at a later date.
   For example Mallet might intercept Alice's request to download her
   mail file on Monday and then replays it each day to receive the mail
   for the rest of the week. 


   Replay attacks may be prevented by checking message timestamps.
   Unfortunately this requires accurate and secure synchronisation of
   clocks at both ends of the communication which is difficult.
   Alternatively a challenge/response sequence may be employed. This
   introduces an additional round trip delay into the transaction and
   requires the server to maintain a check of which challenges have
   already been responded to. 


   The session identifier URI may be used to prevent replay attacks in
   combination with a timestamp. The server maintains a record of each
   identifier used and checks that subsequent requests with that
   identifier have a higher count field. The volume of data storage
   required may be minimized by checking that the timestamp falls
   within an acceptable validity interval. 


Implementation Issues 


   A standardized method of constructing session identifiers would
   permit users to use the same session identification information on
   different machines avoiding the need to re-register with content
   providers. This would also be convenient for content providers,
   avoiding a user with more than one machine being counted twice. The
   nature of the session identifiers prevents enforcement of such a
   policy however and the following construction method is therefore
   only advisory. 


   A convenient method of constructing session identifiers which does
   not require separate storage for each realm visited is to use a
   Message Authentication Code (MAC) based upon a cryptographically
   secure one way function such as MD5 [Rivest92]. 


   On initialization the client obtains a value _key_. This value
   should be selected in a random manner so as to provide at least 128
   bits of ergodicity. When a realm is visited the value of the
   identifier field is created using the formula 


   _identifier = MD5 (realm + key)_. 


   The client should store the value of _key_ and the counter value
   associated with each thread. 


HTTP Integration 


   Session identifiers may be incorporated in HTTP messages using the
   Session-Id header. The existing WWW-Authenticate header is extended
   to permit use of session identifiers as a lightweight authentication


Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                 Page 6




Session Identification URI                                                    


   mechanism. 


Session-Id 


   
   Session-Id: _URI_
   


   The Session-Id header may be incorporated in a http request or
   response. The header accepts a single parameter, the identifier URI. 


   Session identifiers are only created by clients. A Session-Id header
   should only be present in a response if one was specified in the
   corresponding request and should return the same session identifier
   value as the request. 


Example 


   The following example shows a HTTP request incorporating a session
   identifier. 


   
   GET / HTTP/1.0
   Accept: text/plain
   Accept: text/html
   Session-Id: SID:ANON:w3.org:j6oAOxCWZh/CD723LGeXlf-01:034
   User-Agent: libwww/4.1
   
   


   A client supporting session identifier URIs should by default attach
   a session identifier to every request using the DNS name of the
   server as the realm. Clients must provide users with an option to
   disable session identifier generation. Clients are encouraged to
   provide a means of selecting the _realm -> identifier_ mapping. 


WWW-Authenticate 


   
   WWW-Authenticate: _1#challenge_
   


   The WWW-Authenticate header is used by a server to request that a
   client to provide a session identifier where none was given or to
   specify one for an alternative realm. This mechanism permits linkage
   of identifiers across realms, but only under user control. 


Example 


   The following data shows a server requesting an identifier for the
   realm "w3.org". 


   


Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                 Page 7




Session Identification URI                                                    


   HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized 
   WWW-Authenticate: Session, realm=w3.org
   Server: libwww/4.1
   
   


   Clients must not automatically respond to a WWW-Authenticate
   challenge without user direction. 


   A client may offer the user a facility whereby requests for session
   identifiers in alternative names are automatically accepted provided
   they are compatible. Realms may be considered compatible provided
   they are a non trivial prefix of the server dns name. For example a
   server www.w3.org request for the session identifier in the realm
   w3.org would be regarded as compatible but requests for w3.com,
   mit.edu or org would not. DNS names in the toplevel domains com,
   edu, gov, mil and org may generally be considered non trivial
   prefixes (the exclusion of net from this list is intentional. Other
   DNS domains may be considered non trivial prefixes if they are below
   the second level of the DNS hierarchy. 


Security Considerations 


   Security considerations are discussed throughout this paper in
   addition to this section. 


Unintended Linkage 


   Collusion between sites may permit linkage of session identifiers
   between realms. A server may permit linkage between identifiers
   within its own realm and another by incorporating the identifier
   component in a URI. The server www.w3.org receiving the session
   identifier SID:ANON:www.w3.org:j6oAOxCWZh/CD723LGeXlf-01:34 could
   construct an identifier
   http://ai.mit.edu/link/j6oAOxCWZh/CD723LGeXlf. If the link was
   followed the server ai.mit.edu would be able to track the user's
   activity across both realms. 


Unsafe Construction Techniques. 


   Care must be taken in constructing session identifiers. A keyed
   digest technique known to be cryptographically sound is recommended.
   In particular implementors should note that a number of techniques
   for constructing MACs from ciphers using XOR functions are insecure
   for this application. 


Further Work 


Data Escrow Agents. 


   The method for constructing session identification URIs described
   provides only one possible compromise between privacy and tracking.
   In particular no provision is made for supporting joint registration


Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                 Page 8




Session Identification URI                                                    


   services. Such services would permit a user to register demographic
   details (age, sex, interests etc.) with a single server 


   Data Escrow Agents support Joint registration services without
   compromising user privacy. A data escrow agent would capture
   demographic data at a central location, and analyze content
   providers log files on their behalf. Escrow agents would be
   responsible for preventing content providers receiving data detailed
   enough to compromise user privacy. 


   In order to protect user privacy session identifiers must only be
   linkable by the data escrow agent. This may be achieved using either
   public key cryptography or message authentication codes. 


   In an implementation of a data escrow agent using public keys the
   data escrow agent provides each content provider with the public
   component of a public key pair. A user visiting a content provider's
   site first creates a session identifier as if the escrow agent's
   realm were to be visited then encrypts it using the content
   provider's public key to create a session identifier specific to the
   content provider. In order to analyze a log file the escrow agent
   decrypts the session identifiers using the private portion of the
   key. 


   In an implementation of a data escrow agent using a MAC, the user
   provides the data escrow agent with demographic data indexed by a
   session identifier keyed to the agent's realm. When contacting a
   content provider the client constructs a session identifier using a
   MAC of the session identifier keyed by the provider's realm. The
   escrow agent may construct a linkage between the provider's logfiles
   and entries in the escrowed database by calculating a MAC for every
   entry in the database. Although this technique involves a larger
   number of operations that the public key based scheme, these
   operations are approximately four orders of magnitude faster. 


Interaction with Proxies and Caches. 


   Many Web users browse the Web through a caching proxy. In many
   countries this mode of operation is essential due to saturation of
   international network connections. When a proxy serves a user from a
   local cache the originating server has no knowledge of the
   transaction. Consequently logfiles may be incomplete. This problem
   is most serious for commercial sites which use hit counts as a
   measure of readership. 


   A number of techniques may be used to prevent proxies from caching
   data. This permits demographic data to be collected at the cost of
   severely reducing network response. In a significant number of cases
   this will prevent a user from receiving any data at all [Smith96]. 


   A better solution is to provide a mechanism whereby a proxy supplies
   a server on request with a log of hits served from the cache. Such
   logs are potentially of value as an indication of audited


Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                 Page 9




Session Identification URI                                                    


   circulation, particularly if they were to be authenticated using a
   digital signature technique. In some circumstances it may be
   desirable for providers of such information to mask usernames by
   using session identifiers. It is intended to address these issues in
   a separate document. 


Acknowledgments 


   Dave Raggett made the original proposal to use an anonymous session
   identifier for capture of demographic data. Rohit Khare and Dan
   Connoly helped refine many of the ideas. Roger Hurwitz and John
   Mallery made many helpful comments on early versions of this draft. 


Authors Addresses 


   
   Phillip M. Hallam-Baker
   hallam@w3.org
   World Wid Web Consortium
   Cambridge MA
   
   Dan Connolly
   connolly@w3.org
   World Wid Web Consortium
   Cambridge MA
   
   


References 


   [Netscape95] 
       Netscape Communications Corp.  Persistent client State HTTP
       Cookies_ 


   [Hallam96] 
       Phillip M. Hallam-Baker _ Extended Log File Format_ 


   [Kristol95] 
       Kristol, D. _ Proposed HTTP State-Info Mechanism _ 


   [Connoly96] 
       Dan Connoly  _Proposals for Gathering Consumer Demographics_ 


   [Hallam93] 
       Phillip M. Hallam-Baker _Design note on HTTP referer field._
       Memo to Tim Berners-Lee. 


   [Smith96] 
       Neil Smith, Address at MIT  _Workshop on Internet Survey
       Methodology and Web Demographics_ January 29-30 1996. Cambridge
       Ma. 


   [Rivest92] 


Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                Page 10




Session Identification URI                                                    


       Rivest, R., _"The MD4 Message-Digest Algorithm"_, RFC 1321, MIT
       and RSA Data Security, Inc., April 1992 


   [Berners-Lee96] 
       Tim Berners-Lee, Roy T. Fielding, and Henrik Frystyk Nielsen. 
       _Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.0_ 


   [Gill96] 
       Neil Smith, Address at MIT  _Workshop on Internet Survey
       Methodology and Web Demographics_ January 29-30 1996. Cambridge
       Ma. 


   [RFC1034] 
       P. Mockapetris. _Domain Name System_ . ( RFC1034, RFC1035)
       November 1987 


   [Hallam-Baker94] 
       Phillip M. Hallam-Baker _Shen Secure Hypertext Environment,
       Design Notes._ CERN Programming Techniques Group. 





















































Phillip M. Hallam-Baker                                                Page 11

