
                            License Agreement for 
                 The Common Lisp Hypermedia Server (CL-HTTP)


CL-HTTP is Copyright (c) John C. Mallery, 1994-1999. All rights reserved.
Some files carry copyrights by other parties, which should be respected.

CL-HTTP is distributed in the hope that it will be useful but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

By using the server or retaining a copy of the distribution, you acknowledge
that you accept the terms and limitations of this license.

Personal, educational, and commercial uses are allowed and may incorporate
CL-HTTP into applications provided that:

        a. The licensee preserves all original copyrights in the CL-HTTP
        files;

        b. The licensee clearly separates their own code from the distributed
        sources;

        c. The licensee submits any extensions or improvements to CL-HTTP to
        the developers at bug-cl-http@ai.mit.edu;

        d. The licensee prominently displays the fact that your application
        uses CL-HTTP;

        e. The licensee prominently indicates that CL-HTTP was developed by
        and is owned by John C. Mallery;

        f. The licensee advises their users that they may obtain the latest
        release of CL-HTTP from ftp://ftp.ai.mit.edu/pub/users/jcma/cl-http/

        g. The licensee advises their users that that the homepage for the
        server is located at
        http://www.ai.mit.edu/projects/iiip/doc/cl-http/home-page.html

        h. The licensee informs the CL-HTTP user community of any novel or
        significant uses in a timely manner by submitting a short description
        of the server to www-cl@ai.mit.edu

	i. The licensee may not publicly redistribute CL-HTTP, except in
	exactly the authoritative form the licensee received the CL-HTTP
	distribution from ftp://ftp.ai.mit.edu/pub/users/jcma/cl-http/

	j. Any modifications by the licensee to the authoritative CL-HTTP must
	be distributed publicly as separate entities;

	k. The licensee may not use the CL-HTTP technology for the purposes of
	illegal or anti-social activities. Anti-social activities include, but are not
        limited to, attacks  on computer systems and acquisition of email addresses
        for the purposes of transmiting spam email;

	l. The licensee may not operate a CL-HTTP server without sending the
	HTTP server header containing the true CL-HTTP server name and
	version, as determined by the authoritative distribution. Nor may the
	licensee willfully employ other methods to hide the fact that the licensee is
	using CL-HTTP;

        M. Academic licensees who publish research papers or books building on
        CL-HTTP acknowledge that failure to cite their use of CL-HTTP in the
        development or deployment of research systems constitutes plagarism.

However, all worldwide academic or commercial publication rights for CL-HTTP 
server in any form are hereby reserved.  

Additionally, all rights are reserved to any derivative works based on the
Lisp source code in the CL-HTTP distribution, in particular but not limited to
any automatic or manual translation of the source code into other computer
languages or executables.

Any rights not explicitly waived are retained.

Subsequent versions of CL-HTTP may have different copyright statements and
license requirements once it becomes clear precisely what arrangements best
serve the Lisp community.

In the meantime, the right to change this license for CL-HTTP in anyway at
anytime is hereby reserved, any prior clauses notwithstanding.

If any of elements of this agreement are found to be unenforceable, the others
will remain in effect.

This license agreement is governed by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and the United States of America.

Parties interested in commercial licenses should contact the author.

The author can be contacted at:

John C. Mallery
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
545 Technology Square, NE43-807
Cambridge, MA 02139-4301
USA

WWW: http://www.ai.mit.edu/people/jcma/jcma.html
Email: JCMa@ai.mit.edu
