
URN Working Group                                             M.Mealling
INTERNET-DRAFT                                   Network Solutions, Inc.
Expires six months from June 1998
Intended category: Experimental
draft-ietf-urn-net-procedures-00.txt

     Assignment Procedures for the URI Resolution using DNS (RFC2168)

Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
material or to cite them other than as work in progress.

To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
(Northern Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au
(Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu
(US West Coast).

Abstract

RFC2168 defines a DNS resource record and an algorithm for using DNS
as a registry for retrieving URN authority delegation rules (sometimes
called resolution hints). That document specifies that the first step
in that algorithm is to lookup the first NAPTR record for the namespace-
id in the "urn.net" zone; i.e., the first step in resolving 
"urn:ietf:rfc:2168" would be to lookup a NAPTR record for the domain
"ietf.urn.net". This document describes the procedures for inserting
a new rule into this DNS-based URI resolution registry.

1. Introduction

In the course of defining a resolution mechanism [RFC2168] according
to the rules in RFC2276 [RFC2276] for Uniform Resource Names [RFC2141],
it became apparent that the same system could be used to resolve 
URIs [RFC1738] in the general case. Thus, RFC2168 was specified in 
such a way as to be generic in its discussions of URNs vs URLs. The 
end result of this is that RFC2168 defines two things: a Resolver 
Discovery System registry for URNs and a resolver discovery system 
for URLs. While this may not seem an important distinction to the 
casual reader there are some important distinctions in terms of 
creating new URN namespaces and new URI schemes. Thus, its 
assignment procedures for the RFC2168 defines registry must adhere 
to the procedures defined in the assignment documents of both systems. 

At the same time this document must also define its own procedures,
which will ensure its stability and impact on the Domain Name System.
These include optimizations such as an extremely long time to live
on the values in the urn.net zone and efficient uses of delegations
to minimize delegation loops.


Mealling                                                        [Page 1]

draft-ietf-urn-urn.net-procedures-00.txt                       June 1998

2. URL Resolution

At this time there is no set procedure for registering new URL schemes
other than a published RFC. Due to this lack and the existence of
non-published schemes such as "about" and "res", there is an IETF
working group discussing how to deal with this problem. Thus, at
this time the only requirements for requesting an entry in the urn.net
zone is that the URL scheme be published or in use somewhere and that
it not conflict with an existing URL scheme. 

When the IETF does standardize a set of procedures for vetting and
registering new URL schemes, the urn.net registration procedures MUST
adhere to those procedures for determining if the URL scheme in question
is valid.

3. URN Resolution

RFCXXXX defines the procedures for assignment of new URN namespace-ids.
Since the urn.net registration procedures only deal with the 
namespace-id portion of the URN space, that document is the sole 
determining document for what can be entered into the urn.net zone
for a URN. 

4. Delegation Requirements

Delegation of a namespace can happen in two ways. In the case of 
a URL where the entity being delegated to is hard-coded into the
identifier itself, the syntax of where this is located is set.
In the case where the entity being delegated to is set in the rule,
that entity can change as the rule changes.

One of the optimizations that the urn.net registry attempts to make
is that any entry in that zone should have an extremely long 
time to live. 'Extremely long' should be measured in years if possible.
Thus, any rule that can change must be delegated out of the urn.net
zone by a replacement rule in the NAPTR record.  For example, the 'foo'
URN namespace has flexible rules for how delegation takes place. Instead
of putting those rules in the urn.net zone, the entry instead punts
those rules off to a nameserver that has a shorter time to live. The
record in urn.net would look like this:

foo     IN NAPTR 100 10  ""  "" "" urn-resolver.foo.com.

Thus, when the client starts out in the resolution process, the second
step is to begin asking 'urn-resolver.foo.com' for the NAPTR records
that contain the resolution rules.

Conversely, the 'http' URL scheme adheres to a particular syntax that
specifies that the host to ask is specified in the URL in question.
Since this syntax does not change, that rule can be specified in the
urn.net zone. The record would look like this:

http    IN NAPTR 100 100 "" ""  "/http:\\/\\/([^\\/:]+)/\\2/i" .



Mealling                                                        [Page 2]

draft-ietf-urn-urn.net-procedures-00.txt                       June 1998

Thus, the second step of resolution is to attempt to contact the
host contained in the URL itself.

5. Submission Procedure

Using the MIME Content-Type registration mechanism [RFC2048] as a
model for a successful registration mechanism, the urn.net procedure
consists of a request template submitted to a open mailing list
made up of interested parties. If no objections are made within
a two week period, a representative of the urn.net registration
authority considers the submission to be accepted and enters
that submission into the nameserver. 

At this time the registration authority is expected to be the IANA.

Objections are restricted to those that point out impacts on
the urn.net zone itself or to DNS in general. Objections to the URL
scheme or to the URN namespace-id are not allowed, as these should
be raised in their respective forums. The logical conclusion of
this is that ANY sanctioned URL scheme or URN namespace MUST
be allowed to be registered if it meets the requirements specified 
in this document as regards times to live and general impact
to the DNS.

Updating a record in the urn.net zone also requires that the same
process to be followed. Since urn.net is designed with a long time to
live, changes to records in that zone are discouraged. Thus updates
must follow the same procedures as a new request. Changes will
be given a higher level of scrutiny, as they may represent 
potential problems with a specific delegation.

6. Registration Template

The template to be sent to the list MUST contain the following
values:

6.1 Type

Either SCHEME or NID. SCHEME specifies that the record being registered
represents a URL scheme. NID specifies that it is a URN namespace-id.

6.2 Key

This is the domain portion. It must be valid according to the
procedures specified in the URN namespace-id assignment document
and any future standards for registering new URL schemes.

6.3 Authority

This is the authority doing the registration of the record. It must
be an authority recognized as either the IESG or an authority
specified in the documents submitted for approval by any URN or URL
registration mechanism.



Mealling                                                        [Page 3]

draft-ietf-urn-urn.net-procedures-00.txt                       June 1998

6.4 Records

One or more records representing the rule set for the key. The required
values are Preference, Order, Flags, Services, Regex, and Replacement
as defined by RFC2168.

7. Example Template

To: register@urn.net
From: joe@foo.com

Type: NID
Key: foo
Authority: Foo Technology, Inc as specified in RFCFOO
Record: foo	IN NAPTR 100 100 "" "" "" urn.foo.com.

8. IANA Considerations

This document describes a mechanism for registering representations of
protocol items that have already been registered with some IETF
sanctioned agency (probably the IANA as well). This means that the IANA
need not determine appropriateness of the underlying namespaces,
since that is determined by another process.

The only real impact on the IANA will be:

    to maintain (or designate some other entity to maintain) a primary
    nameserver for the urn.net zone; 

    to maintain the mailing list "register@urn.net" as the forum for
    discussions of submissions; and

    to act as the party that determines if all objections have been
    noted and accommodated.

7. References

  [RFC2168] Ron Daniel & Michael Mealling, "Resolution of Uniform
      Resource Identifiers using the Domain Name System", RFC 2168,
      June 1997.

  [RFC2276] K. Sollins, "Architectural Principles of Uniform Resource
      Name Resolution", RFC 2276, January 1998.

  [RFC2141] Ryan Moats, "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

  [RFC1738] T. Berners-Lee, L. Masinter and M. McCahill,
      "Uniform Resource Locators (URL)" RFC 1738, December 1994.
      <URL:ftp://ftp.internic.net/rfc/rfc1738.txt>

  [RFC2048] N. Freed, J. Klensin, J. Postel, "Multipurpose Internet
      Mail Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration Procedures", 
      RFC 2048, November 1996.



Mealling                                                        [Page 4]

draft-ietf-urn-urn.net-procedures-00.txt                       June 1998

8. Author Contact Information

Michael Mealling
Network Solutions
505 Huntmar Park Drive
Herndon, VA 22070
voice: (703) 742-0400
fax: (703) 742-9552
email: michaelm@rwhois.net













































             This document expires 6 months from June, 1997

Mealling                                                        [Page 5]
